how-to: add stage outputs existing in the WS but missing from dvc.yaml (#1840)
iterative/dvc.org: content/docs/user-guide/how-to/add-output-to-stage.md

# Add Output to Stage

There are situations where we have executed a stage (either by writing
`dvc.yaml` manually and using `dvc repro`, or with `dvc run`), but later notice
that some of its output files or directories, which are already in the
workspace, are missing from `dvc.yaml` (`outs` field). Follow the steps below to
add existing files or directories as outputs to a stage without re-executing it

> again, which can be expensive/time-consuming, but is unnecessary.

Reviewer: Here it is. Notice how I clarify the diff between files/dirs written by the stage vs. outputs (in `<abbr>`) tracked by DVC (`outs` field of dvc.yaml). Please apply similar changes to the other 2 docs if you haven't and request my review again to finalize this. Thanks

Reviewer: Actually, this is missing `<abbr>` tags around the 2nd instance of "outputs" 🤦. Please add them @imhardikj, thanks.

Reviewer: ACTUALLY, you can just commit this (made another small copy edit for extra clarification between written files vs tracked outputs):
```suggestion
There are situations where we have executed a stage (either by writing
`dvc.yaml` manually and using `dvc repro`, or with `dvc run`), but later notice
that some of the files or directories it writes, which are already in the
workspace, are missing from `dvc.yaml` (`outs` field). Follow the steps below to
add existing files or directories as <abbr>outputs</abbr> to a stage without
re-executing it again, which can be expensive/time-consuming, but is
unnecessary.
```

Reviewer: p.s. Not sure whether it should be "it writes" or "it creates" — up to you.

Author: used "creates" because every time before execution existing outputs are deleted, and then new ones are created.

# Add Output to Stage

There are situations where we have executed a stage (either by writing
`dvc.yaml` manually and using `dvc repro`, or with `dvc run`), but later notice

> that some of its output files or directories it creates, which are already in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that some of the output files or directories it creates, which are already in
```

> are missing from `dvc.yaml` (`outs` fields). Follow the steps below to add

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are missing from `dvc.yaml` (`outs` field). Follow the steps below to add
```

requires time and resources. Follow the steps below to add existing output(s) to

> a stage without executing it again.

Reviewer: This is pretty good writing, nice. But reading it now I just have one last concern. Will people understand what we mean by "output(s) already existing in workspace"? ("THE workspace" BTW 😕)
We could clarify what an output is in this case: file(s) written by the stage command (which we want to track with DVC).

Reviewer: Also, please use `<abbr>` arround "output" in the 2nd or last instance of the word (once we're clearly referring to outputs tracked by DVC).

Reviewer: > add existing output(s) to a stage

Hmmm. How about something like "add existing files or directories as outputs to a stage (`outs` field)" to make sure we separate the concepts of files in the workspace from tracked outputs, like I mentioned earlier? Please rewrite the p along these lines. Almost there...

Reviewer: I see you added a definition of what outputs are. That tries to address this but isn't subtle enough. I've finished this change for you as it's a little complicated I suppose, resolving here!

Author: Thank You. I tried to include that but the sentence became very complex so I thought I'd rather make a separate one. Thanks again btw.

> requires time and resources. Follow the steps below to add already existing
> output(s) to a stage without executing it again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
requires time and resources. Follow the steps below to add existing output(s)
to a stage without executing it again.
```

> that some of its output files or directories, which already exist in workspace,
> are missing from `dvc.yaml` (`outs` field). Follow the steps below to add
> existing files or directories as outputs to a stage without re-executing it
> again, which can be expensive/time-consuming, but is unnecessary.

Reviewer: @imhardikj still missing that "the" 😢 
```suggestion
that some of its output files or directories, which are already in the
workspace, are missing from `dvc.yaml` (`outs` field). Follow the steps below to
add existing files or directories as outputs to a stage without re-executing it
again, which can be expensive/time-consuming, but is unnecessary.
```

Reviewer: I fixed this BTW.

> There are situations where we have executed a stage (either by writing
> `dvc.yaml` manually and using `dvc repro`, or with `dvc run`), but later notice
> that some of its output files or directories, which already exist in workspace, are missing from `dvc.yaml` (`outs` fields).
> Follow the steps below to
> add existing files or directories as outputs to a stage
> without re-executing it again, which can be expensive/time-consuming, but is unnecessary.

Reviewer: OK just need to format it now:
```suggestion
There are situations where we have executed a stage (either by writing
`dvc.yaml` manually and using `dvc repro`, or with `dvc run`), but later notice
that some of its output files or directories, which already exist in workspace,
are missing from `dvc.yaml` (`outs` fields). Follow the steps below to add
existing files or directories as outputs to a stage without re-executing it
again, which can be expensive/time-consuming, but is unnecessary.
```

> the workspace, are missing from `dvc.yaml` (`outs` field). Follow the steps
> below to add existing files or directories as <abbr>outputs</abbr> to a stage
> without re-executing it again, which can be expensive/time-consuming, but is
> unnecessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the <abbr>workspace</abbr>, are missing from `dvc.yaml` (`outs` field). Follow
the steps below to add existing files or directories as <abbr>outputs</abbr> to
a stage without re-executing it again, which can be expensive/time-consuming,
but is unnecessary.
```

> the <abbr>workspace</abbr>, are missing from `dvc.yaml` (`outs` field). Follow
> the steps below to add existing files or directories as <abbr>outputs</abbr> to
> a stage without re-executing it again, which can be expensive/time-consuming,
> but is unnecessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the <abbr>workspace</abbr>, are missing from `dvc.yaml` (`outs` field). Follow
the steps below to add existing files or directories as <abbr>outputs</abbr> to
a stage without re-executing it again, which can be expensive/time-consuming,
and is unnecessary.
```

> We start with an example `prepare` stage in `dvc.yaml`, which has a single
> output. To add a missing output `data/validate` to this stage, we can edit
> `dvc.yaml` like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We start with an example `prepare`, which has a single output. To add a missing
output `data/validate` to this stage, we can edit `dvc.yaml` like this:
```

```git
 stages:
   prepare:
     cmd: python src/prepare.py
     deps:
     - src/prepare.py
     outs:
     - data/train
+    - data/validate
```

> Note that you can also use `dvc run` with the `-f` and `--no-exec` options to
> add another output to the stage:
>
> ```dvc
> $ dvc run -f --no-exec \
>           -n prepare \
>           -d src/prepare.py \
>           -o data/train \
>           -o data/validate \
>           python src/prepare.py
> ```
>

> > The `-f` option overwrites the stage in `dvc.yaml`, and the `--no-exec` option
> > updates the stage without executing it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> `-f` overwrites the stage in `dvc.yaml`, while `--no-exec` updates the stage
> without executing it.
```

# Add Output to Stage

There are situations where we have executed a stage (either by writing
`dvc.yaml` manually and using `dvc repro`, or with `dvc run`), but later notice

> that some of its output files or directories, which already exist in workspace, are missing from `dvc.yaml` (`outs` field).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that some of its output files or directories, which already exist in workspace, are missing from `dvc.yaml` (`outs` fields).
```

Re-executing a stage using `dvc run -f` to add an output is an expensive step,
as it requires time and resources. Follow the steps below to add an output to

> the stage without executing it again.

Reviewer: Still needs to be a little more general like we discussed. And no need to mention dvc run -f here.

> Re-executing a stage to specify all the <abbr>outputs</abbr> is
> an expensive step, as it requires time and resources. Follow the steps below to
> add existing files or directories as output(s) to a stage (`outs` field in
> `dvc.yaml`) without executing it again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Follow the steps below to
add existing files or directories as outputs to a stage
without re-executing it again, which can be expensive/time-consuming, but is unnecessary.
```

We start with an example `prepare` stage in `dvc.yaml`, which has a single
output. To add a missing output to this stage, we can edit `dvc.yaml` like this:

```git
 stages:
   prepare:
     cmd: python src/prepare.py
     deps:
     - src/prepare.py
     outs:
     - data/train
+    - data/validate
```

> We have added `data/validate` as an output to the `prepare` stage.

Reviewer: Not sure about the usefulness of this sentence, maybe just mention it in the previous paragraph before the code block.

> Note that you can also use `dvc run` with the `-f` and `--no-exec` options to
> add another output to the stage:
>
> ```dvc
> $ dvc run -f --no-exec \
>           -n prepare \
>           -d src/prepare.py \
>           -o data/train \
>           -o data/validate \
>           python src/prepare.py
> ```
>
> The `-f` option overwrites the stage in `dvc.yaml`, and the `--no-exec` option
> updates the stage without executing it.

> Finally, we need to run `dvc commit`. It saves the newly specified outputs to
> the <abbr>cache</abbr> (and updates their hash values in `dvc.lock`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, we need to run `dvc commit` to saves the newly specified output(s) to
the <abbr>cache</abbr> (and to update the corresponding hash values in
`dvc.lock`):
```
> May break the format

# Add Output to Stage

There are situations where we have executed a stage (either by writing
`dvc.yaml` manually and using `dvc repro`, or with `dvc run`), but later notice

> that output(s) already existing in workspace are missing from `dvc.yaml`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that some of its output files or directories, which already exist in workspace, are missing from `dvc.yaml` (`outs` field).
```

> Outputs are files or directories written by the stage commands which we want to
> track with DVC. Re-executing a stage to specify all the <abbr>outputs</abbr> is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Re-executing a stage to specify all the <abbr>outputs</abbr> is
```

# Add Output to Stage

There are situations where we run a stage without specifying all the
<abbr>outputs</abbr>, and then later want to add more outputs to that stage. If
we use `dvc run` to add outputs, it will re-run the stage.

Running a stage is an expensive step, as it requires time and resources to

> execute the command. Follow the steps listed below to add an output to the stage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
execute the command. Follow the steps below to add an output to the stage
```

without running it again.

> We have an example stage `prepare` defined in `dvc.yaml`. To add another output

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We start with an example `prepare` stage in `dvc.yaml`. To add another output
```

> We have an example stage `prepare` defined in `dvc.yaml`. To add another output
> `data/test` to this stage, we can edit `dvc.yaml`. This is how it looks after
> the change:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We start with an example `prepare` stage in `dvc.yaml`, which has a single
output. To add a missing output to this stage, we can edit the file like this:
```

```dvc
$ cat dvc.yaml
stages:
  prepare:
    cmd: python src/prepare.py
    deps:
    - src/prepare.py
    outs:
    - data/train

> +   - data/test

Reviewer: We have to decide whether we're using ` ```dvc ` and the `$ cat ...` console example OR the ` ```git ` format (no `$` line) which supports the `+` line highlighting. The latter seems more important it has already been mentioned that this is a dvc.yaml file. BTW I think all lines need an extra space at the beginning to align with the one starting with `+`, please check how it gets rendered in your local dev env.

Reviewer: Also data/test -> data/validate please

```

> That's it, the new output has been added to the `prepare` stage.

Reviewer: I see I suggested the was that sentence begins in https://github.com/iterative/dvc.org/pull/1840#pullrequestreview-503224505 but it no longer makes sense after moving stuff around.

> Note that you can also use `dvc run` with the `-f` and `--no-exec` options to
> add another output to the stage:
>
> ```dvc
> $ dvc run -f --no-exec \
>           -n prepare \
>           -d src/prepare.py \
>           -o data/train \
>           -o data/test \
>           python src/prepare.py
> ```
>

> > The `-f` option is used to overwrite an existing stage in the `dvc.yaml`, and

Reviewer: the dvc.yaml ? Either just dvc.yaml, or "the dvc.yaml file", remember? "the" needs a noun. "dvc.yaml" is a name so doesn't need an article (the).

Grammar https://owl.purdue.edu/owl/general_writing/grammar/using_articles.html

Reviewer: "is used to overwrite an existing stage" is a little overcomplicated language and too generic, when we're talking about a specific use. It can just be "overwrites the stage". Simple, direct language 🙂

> the `--no-exec` option is used to create or update a stage without executing

> > the command.

Reviewer: This wasn't applied but I just did it so we can move on...

Finally, we need to run `dvc commit`. It saves the newly specified outputs to

> the <abbr>cache</abbr> and updates their hash values in `dvc.lock`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the <abbr>cache</abbr> (and updates their hash values in `dvc.lock`):
```

# Add Output to Stage

There are situations where you might have forgotten to specify one of the
<abbr>outputs</abbr> for a stage while creating it, and then later want to add

> an output to that stage.

Reviewer: Correct but this is not the only case where this scenario happens. The more generalized explanation here I think has to do with having run a stage without specifying all the outpus in dvc.yaml (either via run or manually) and later wanting to make some of the files/dirs produces by the state as outputs formally.

Reviewer: (Without rerunning the stage)

Reviewer: So pleas give the more general explanation and/or list all the ways that you can think about that a user would end up with this problem.

Running a stage to specify additional output is an expensive step, as it
requires time and resources to execute the command. Follow the steps listed
below to add an output to the stage without running it again.

> Let's first create a stage for the example <abbr>project</abbr>:

Reviewer: What example project?

```dvc
$ dvc run -n prepare \
          -d src/prepare.py \
          -o data/train \
          python src/prepare.py
```

You can check stage entry in `dvc.yaml`:

```dvc
$ cat dvc.yaml

> stages:

Reviewer: Yeah in fact the dvc.yaml file is what really matter here. Using `dvc run` is not required and in fact we encourage users to make dvc.yaml files manually and only consider `run` a helper. The `run` command block could stay but as a note after the dvc.yaml block.

  prepare:
    cmd: python src/prepare.py
    deps:
    - src/prepare.py
    outs:
    - data/train
```

> Now to add an output to the `prepare` stage, you need to use `dvc run` with the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To add another output to the `prepare` stage, you need to use `dvc run` with the
```
> May need formatting.

Reviewer: Nice writing BTW, thanks!

But again, this is very `run`-centric. Let's explain what should happen to the dvc.yaml file first and then add the `run -f --no-exec` command as an alternative (note) to manual editing.

Author: The emphasis (in the update) is on editing `dvc.yaml` now I think. Also `dvc run` is moved to a block quote.

`-f` and `--no-exec` options:

```dvc
$ dvc run -f --no-exec \
          -n prepare
          -d src/prepare.py \
          -o data/train \
          -o data/test \
          python src/prepare.py
```

The `-f` option is used to overwrite an existing stage in the `dvc.yaml`, and
the `--no-exec` option is used to create or update a stage without executing the
command defined in it.

Let's check `dvc.yaml` again:

```dvc
$ cat dvc.yaml
stages:
  prepare:
    ...

>     outs:

Reviewer: I feel like we could compress the whole How To into a single code block that shows the "diff" between dvc.yaml before and after the new output is added. See https://dvc.org/doc/start/data-pipelines (expand the first **Expand to see what happens under the hood.** to see the block I mean):

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1477535/95241633-a6a11300-07d3-11eb-86b5-f6a97bdb9724.png)

Reviewer: Same for the `run` command notes, it could be a single block quote after the dvc.yaml block with both run commands one after the other basically. Let's see what you can come up with 🙂

Author: I have added this "diff" part but it isn't showing green color in my local environment.
Also as you said I moved the `dvc run` code to a block quote. But I have only kept the second one (with `-f` and `--no-exec`) as this how-to is about what happens after creating a stage. That is, the user might have already created the stage so I think the `dvc run` code showing creating the stage won't be required here. The other reason being that the block quote became too long.

Reviewer: > added this "diff" part but it isn't showing green color

It should. Did you check the example from where I took a screenshot to see what the code is? That MD code formatter is `git`.

> moved the dvc run code to a block quote

Goodm thanks

> the user might have already created the stage

Yep, not might: that's exactly the situation we're writing about 🙂

    - data/test
    - data/train
```

> As you can see, the new output has been added to the `train` stage in

Reviewer: Avoid condescending language:
```suggestion
That' it! The new output has been added to the `train` stage in
```

> As you can see, the new output has been added to the `train` stage in
> `dvc.yaml`. Now you need to run `dvc commit` to update `dvc.lock` and save data

Reviewer: Redundant/obvious:
```suggestion
As you can see, the new output has been added to the `train` stage.
Now you need to run `dvc commit` to update `dvc.lock` and save data
```

> to the <abbr>cache</abbr>:

Reviewer: I guess the whole paragraph about "the new output has been added" is repetitive to previous paragraphs or could be included in the previous p. Let's just leave the one about `commit` here? And also move the very last sentence up to this paragraph to keep things concise?

Reviewer: But it feels like the `commit` part could use a little more explaining. Why is it necessary, what does it do in the cache, etc.
